# Project Pickings

Tazer, a pharmaceutical manufacturing company, entered the pharmaceutical market 12 years ago with the introduction of six new drugs. Five of the six drugs were simply permutations of existing drugs and therefore did not sell very heavily. The sixth drug, however, addressed hypertension and was a huge success. Since Tazer had a patent on the hypertension drug, it experienced no competition, and profits from the hypertension drug alone kept Tazer in business.

During the past 12 years, Tazer continued a moderate amount of research and development, but it never stumbled upon a drug as successful as the hypertension drug. One reason is that the company never had the motivation to invest heavily in innovative research and development. The company was riding the profit wave generated by its hypertension drug and did not feel the need to commit significant resources to finding new drug breakthroughs.

Now Tazer is beginning to fear the pressure of competition. The patent for the hypertension drug expires in 5 years, and Tazer knows that once the patent expires, generic drug manufacturing companies will swarm into the market like vultures. Historical trends show that generic drugs decreased sales of branded drugs by 75 percent.

Tazer is therefore looking to invest significant amounts of money in research and development this year to begin the search for a new breakthrough drug that will offer the company the same success as the hypertension drug. Tazer believes that if the company begins extensive research and development now, the probability of finding a successful drug shortly after the expiration of the hypertension patent
will be high.

As head of research and development at Tazer, you are responsible for choosing potential projects and assigning project directors to lead each of the projects. After researching the needs of the market, analyzing the shortcomings of current drugs, and interviewing numerous scientists concerning the promising areas of medical research, you have decided that your department will pursue five separate projects, which are listed below:

**Project Up:** Develop an antidepressant that does not cause serious mood swings

**Project Stable:** Develop a drug that addresses manic-depression.

**Project Choice:** Develop a less intrusive birth control method for women.

**Project Hope:** Develop a vaccine to prevent HIV infection.

**Project Release:** Develop a more effective drug to lower blood pressure.

For each of the five projects, you are only able to specify the medical ailment the research should address, since you do not know what compounds will exist and be effective without research.

You also have five senior scientists to lead the five projects. You know that scientists are very temperamental people and will work well only if they are challenged and motivated by the project. To ensure that the senior scientists are assigned to projects they find motivating, you have established a bidding system for the projects. You have given each of the five scientists 1000 bid points. They assign bids to each project, giving a higher number of bid points to projects they most prefer to lead. The following table provides the bids from the five individual senior scientists for the five individual projects:

| Project         |  Dr. Kvaal | Dr. Zuner |  Dr. Tsal |  Dr. Mickey | Dr. Rollins |
|-----------------|------------|-----------|-----------|-------------|-------------|
| Project Up      |        100 |         0 |       100 |         267 |         100 | 
| Project Stable  |        400 |       200 |       100 |         153 |          33 |
| Project Choice  |        200 |       800 |       100 |          99 |          33 |
| Project Hope    |        200 |         0 |       100 |         451 |          34 |
| Project Release |        100 |         0 |       600 |          30 |         800 |

(a) Given the bids, you need to assign one senior scientist to each of the five projects to maximize the preferences of the scientists. What are the assignments?

(b) Dr. Rollins is being courted by Harvard Medical School to accept a teaching position. You are fighting desperately to keep her at Tazer, but the prestige of Harvard may lure her away. If this were to happen, the company would give up the project with the least enthusiasm. Which project would not be done?

(c) You do not want to sacrifice any project, since researching only four projects decreases the probability of finding a breakthrough new drug. You decide that either Dr. Zuner or Dr. Mickey could lead two projects. Under these new conditions with just four senior scientists, which scientists will lead which projects to maximize preferences?

(d) After Dr. Zuner was informed that she and Dr. Mickey are being considered for two projects, she decided  to change her bids. The following table shows Dr. Zuner’s new bids for each of the projects

| Project         |  Bids |
|-----------------|-------|
| Project Up      |    20 | 
| Project Stable  |   450 |
| Project Choice  |   451 |
| Project Hope    |    39 |
| Project Release |    40 |

Under these new conditions with just four scientists, which scientists will lead which projects to maximize preferences?

(e) Do you support the assignment found in part (d)? Why or why not?

(f) Now you again consider all five scientists. You decide, however, that several scientists cannot lead certain projects. In particular, Dr. Mickey does not have experience with research on the immune system, so he cannot lead Project Hope. His family also has a history of manic-depression, and you feel that he would be too personally involved in Project Stable to serve as an effective project leader. Dr. Mickey therefore cannot lead Project Stable. Dr. Kvaal also does not have experience with research on the immune systems and cannot lead Project Hope. In addition, Dr. Kvaal cannot lead Project Release because he does not have experience with research on the cardiovascular system. Finally, Dr. Rollins cannot lead Project Up because her family has a history of depression and you feel she would be too personally involved in the project to serve as an effective leader. Because Dr. Mickey and Dr. Kvaal cannot lead two of the five projects, they each have only 600 bid points. Dr. Rollins has only 800 bid points because she cannot lead one of the five projects. The following table provides the new bids of Dr. Mickey, Dr. Kvaal, and Dr. Rollins:

| Project         |  Dr. Mickey |  Dr. Kvaal |  Dr. Rollins |
|-----------------|-------------|------------|--------------|
| Project Up      |         300 |         86 |   can't lead | 
| Project Stable  |  can't lead |        343 |           50 |
| Project Choice  |         125 |        171 |           50 |
| Project Hope    |  can't lead | can't lead |          100 |
| Project Release |         175 | can't lead |          600 |

Which scientists should lead which projects to maximize preferences?

(g) You decide that Project Hope and Project Release are too complex to be led by only one scientist. Therefore, each of these projects will be assigned two scientists as project leaders. You decide to hire two more scientists in order to staff all projects: Dr. Arriaga and Dr. Santos. Because of religious reasons, the two doctors both do not  want to lead Project Choice. The following table lists all projects, scientists, and their bids.


| Project         |      Kvaal | Zuner |  Tsal |     Mickey |    Rollins |    Arriaga | Santos |
|-----------------|------------|-------|-------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
| Project Up      |         86 |     0 |   100 |        300 | can't lead |        250 |        111 |
| Project Stable  |        343 |   200 |   100 | can't lead |         50 |        250 |          1 |
| Project Choice  |        171 |   800 |   100 |        125 |         50 | can't lead | can't lead |
| Project Hope    | can't lead |     0 |   100 | can't lead |        100 |        250 |        333 |
| Project Release | can't lead |     0 |   600 |        175 |        600 |        250 |        555 |

Which scientists should lead which projects to maximize preferences?

**Source:** Hillier, Liebermann: Introduction to Operations Research, 9th edition, 2010

